Annotation Commentary on the Special Teaching of the Wise and Glorious King

by Pema Kunzang Rangdrol

The guru is the essence and embodiment of the three rare and supreme ones, so the text says,
Homage to the master!

There follows an explanation of the view, meditation and conduct related to the names of the
root and lineage masters: The view is Longchen Rabjam: infinite, vast expanse. Meditation
is Khyentse Özer: rays of wisdom and love. Action is Gyalwé Nyugu, that of the bodhisattvas.
One who practises in such a way, renouncing the affairs of this life, if they are able
to take this to heart, may well attain enlightenment in this very life. And even if not,
since they will take up the path again in future, what happiness! What joy! A la la!

1. Introducing directly the face of rigpa in itself

As for the view, Longchen Rabjam, the instruction is the three statements that strike the vital
point. As a means of introducing the view, first, relax and release your mind without
contriving. Wisdom has always been present from the very beginning, so rest in a state that
is neither scattered, nor concentrated, without thoughts. When you do so, as a beginner
it is impossible to avoid attachment to experience, so, while resting in this even state,
at ease, suddenly let out a mind-shattering ‘phaṭ!’, in order to reveal naked and transparently
clear awareness. To cut the chain of thoughts make the sound of 'phaṭ' fierce, forceful
and abrupt. Emaho! Immediately you will experience awareness without reference point,
nakedly clear dharmakāya, wisdom that is beyond the ordinary mind. There is nothing there:
transfixed in wonder, struck by wonder, and yet all is transparent and clear. It is beyond
any extreme such as arising, ceasing and so on. It is inconceivable and inexpressible wisdom:
fresh, pure and sudden, so beyond description. This is the awareness that abides as
the ground. Recognize this as the pure awareness of dharmakāya, since it is the view of primordial
purity beyond elaboration. This is wisdom that abides within and is not to be sought
elsewhere, so the text says, 'The first vital point is: introducing directly the face
of rigpa in itself.'

2. Deciding upon one thing, and one thing only

What follows is how to put this into practice through meditation. Whether mind and thoughts
are in a state of movement or there are no thoughts but only stillness, in a state of anger
or attachment to the five sense pleasures, happiness or sorrow, whatever happens, all the
time, in any situation, you must never be apart from great spontaneous rest in the natural
state. Recognize the view of the dharmakāya you recognized before, and the clear light
of the ground, which is the primordial dharmakāya, and the path clear light pointed out by
the guru — mother and child clear light — already acquainted, will reunite. Rest in the aspect
of awareness, beyond all description, thought and expression. The feeling of stillness,
the feeling of bliss and the feeling of clarity: whatever varied experiences might arise
disrupt them, again and again. Whenever thoughts arise, let out a fierce-sounding 'Phaṭ!'
Suddenly striking with the syllable of skilful means and wisdom, repeatedly exclaim 'Phaṭ!'
and 'Phaṭ!' Immediately disrupt attachment to experience and thinking. You must sustain
the flow of inexpressible and transparently clear awareness with no difference between
meditation and post-meditation. Whatever you are doing, whether sitting still or moving about,
as long as you are not without the mindful awareness that sustains the essential nature,
there will be no division between sessions and breaks. You must always remain in this
indivisible state. But, for those of lesser capacity who might fall under the power of conceptual
thought, until stability is attained, it is vital to meditate, away from all distractions
and busyness, practising in proper meditation sessions and having breaks when you
do not maintain the natural state. For post-meditative awareness you must let go of any focus
and remain in unimpeded clarity. All the time, in any situation, abide by the flow of
what is only dharmakāya — that is, recognizing the dharmakāya view and without any other mental
activity, neither suppressing nor cultivating thoughts. Decide with absolute conviction
that there is nothing other than this— genuine wisdom beyond elaboration, the union of
calm and insight. The second vital point is: deciding upon one thing, and one thing only.

3. Confidence directly in the liberation of rising thoughts

Then, without confidence in the mode of liberation you will be incapable of withstanding the
conditions of attachment and aversion, so the text says: At that time, whether attachment
or aversion, happiness or sorrow—all momentary thoughts, each and every one, whatever arises,
whether gross or subtle, do not part from mindful awareness and do not allow thoughts
to become a subtle undercurrent. Upon recognition, you must allow them to be liberated upon
arising and sustain the recognition so that, just as with writing on water, they leave
not a trace behind. By looking directly into your own essential nature, you will recognize
the dharmakāya in which they are freed, and thoughts will naturally disappear without trace.
Just as writing vanishes on water, arising and liberation become natural and continuous.
And whatever arises as thoughts based on the five poisons is, as long as we allow self-liberation
to unfold, food for the bare rigpa emptiness. Whatever stirs in the mind,** as
long as liberation upon arising is unobstructed, is the inner power of the dharmakāya king.
Thoughts and mental states are purified into dharmakāya, leaving no trace, and innately
pure. What joy! The way things arise may be the same as before, but, since for the yogi thoughts
are liberated upon arising, the difference lies in the way they are liberated: that’s
the key. At the beginning, arising thoughts are liberated upon being recognized, like meeting
an old friend; in the middle, thoughts are liberated by themselves, like a snake uncoiling
its own knots;at the end, arising thoughts are liberated without causing either benefit
or harm, like a thief breaking into an empty house. This is the vital key: the way in
which liberation occurs. Without this, the path that reveals self-liberation directly, meditation
is but the path of delusion. When you have such a key point as this, there’s non-meditation,
meaning that there is no deliberation cultivation fabricated by the mind, and
there is only the state of dharmakāya, without deliberate application or effort. The third
vital point is: confidence directly in the liberation of rising thoughts.

4. Colophon

For the view which has the three vital points mentioned above — introducing directly the face
of rigpa in itself, deciding upon one thing and one thing only, and confidence directly
in the liberation of rising thoughts — meditation, the union of wisdom and love, because when
encountering one's own natural face of primordially pure awareness, the wisdom born of
meditation and compassionate love for beings arise spontaneously. This is accompanied by
the action common to all the bodhisattvas, which can be summed up as the path of the six transcendent
perfections. These develop like the sun and its rays. As for this view, meditation
and action, were all the buddhas of past, present and future to confer, no instruction
would they find greater than this, the key point of the path of the Heart-Essence, the pinnacle
of all vehicles. This profound and succinct instruction was brought out as a treasure
from the depth of transcendental insight, the immaculate words of the sublime lineage
gurus, by the tertön of dharmakāya, the inner power of rigpa. It is nothing like ordinary
treasures of this world, which are but earth and stone, for this instruction of the three
statements that strike the vital point is the profound final testament of Garab Dorje given
to the ācārya Mañjuśrīmitra. It is the essence of the wisdom mind of the three transmissions:
the mind-direct transmission of the victorious ones, sign transmission of the vidyādharas
and whispered transmission of ordinary beings. It is entrusted to my heart disciples,
sealed to be secret — only for students who will practise it but inappropriate to share
with those who will not take the instruction to heart. It is profound in meaning, my heart’s
words. It is the words of my heart, the crucial key point and distillation of the six million
four hundred thousand tantras of the Great Perfection. This crucial point, since it
includes all this without error: never hold it cheap, consider it trivial or treat it with
ambivalence. Never let this instruction slip away from you or go to waste. Such is the advice
given repeatedly.

This is the special teaching of the wise and glorious king. In other words, this is an especially
sublime instruction containing the wisdom nectar of Dza Patrul Jigme Chökyi Wangpo.

These notes were added by Kyabje Choktrul Pema Kunzang Rangdrol Sherab Gyaltsen Palzangpo in
the hermitage of Paldro Gyatsa Drakkar.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2019 on the basis of the root text translated by Rigpa Translations,
2008.