The Special Teaching of the Wise and Glorious King
by Patrul Rinpoche

lama la chaktsal lo
Homage to the master!
tawa longchen rabjam yin
The view is Longchen Rabjam: infinite, vast expanse.
gompa khyentsé özer yin
Meditation is Khyentse Özer: rays of wisdom and love.
chöpa gyalwé nyugu yin
Action is Gyalwé Nyugu, that of the bodhisattvas.
detar nyam su lenpa la
One who practises in such a way,
tsé chik sangye la tangmé
May well attain enlightenment in this very life.
min kyang lo dé a la la
And even if not, what happiness! What joy! A la la!
1. Introducing directly the face of rigpa in itself
tawa longchen rabjam ni
As for the view, Longchen Rabjam,
tsik sum dön gyi né du dek
Three statements strike the vital point.
dangpo rangsem lhödé shyak
First, relax and release your mind,
mi tro mi du namtok mé
Neither scattered, nor concentrated, without thoughts.
ngang la cham né lhödé ngang
While resting in this even state, at ease,
toljung lo dek pé chik gyab
Suddenly let out a mind-shattering ‘phat!’,
drak la ngar tung emaho
Fierce, forceful and abrupt. Amazing!
chiyang mayin hé dewa
There is nothing there: transfixed in wonder,
hé dewa la zangtal lé
Struck by wonder, and yet all is transparent and clear.
zangma tal jung jö du mé
Fresh, pure and sudden, so beyond description:
chökü rigpa ngö zung shik
Recognize this as the pure awareness of dharmakāya.
ngo rang tok tu trepa té né dangpo o
The first vital point is:  introducing directly the face of rigpa in itself.
2. Deciding upon one thing, and one thing only
dené tro’am né kyang rung
Then, whether in a state of movement or stillness,
tro’am chak sam kyi dam duk
Of anger or attachment, happiness or sorrow,
dü dang nekab tamché du
All the time, in any situation,
ngoshé chöku ngö zung la
Recognize that dharmakāya you recognized before,
ngar dri ösal ma bu tré
And mother and child clear light, already acquainted, will reunite.
jömé rikché ngang la shyak
Rest in the aspect of awareness, beyond all description.
né dé sal tro yang yang shik
Stillness and bliss, clarity and thinking: disrupt them, again and again,
tabshé yigé lobur beb
Suddenly striking with the syllable of skilful means and wisdom.
nyam shyak jetob tadé mé
With no difference between meditation and post-meditation,
tün dang tüntsam yewa mé
No division between sessions and breaks,
yermé ngang du gyündu né
Always remain in this indivisible state.
önkyang tenpa matobpar
But, until stability is attained,
dudzi pang né gompa ché
It is vital to meditate, away from all distractions and busyness,
nyam shyak tün du ché laja
Dividing the practice into proper meditation sessions.
dü dang nekab tamché du
All the time, in any situation,
chöku chikpö yolang kyang
Abide by the flow of what is just dharmakāya.
dé lé shyenmé kho takché
Decide with absolute conviction that there is nothing other than this—
tak chik tok tu chepa té nepa nyipa o
The second vital point is: deciding upon one thing, and one thing only.
3. Confidence directly in the liberation of rising thoughts
detsé chakdang ga duk dang
At that point, whether attachment or aversion, happiness or sorrow—
lobur namtok malüpa
All momentary thoughts, each and every one,
ngoshé ngang la jetü mé
Upon recognition, leave not a trace behind.
drol ché chöku ngözungwé
For recognize the dharmakāya in which they are freed,
per na chu yi rimo shyin
And just as writing vanishes on water,
rangshar rangdrol gyünché mé
Arising and liberation become natural and continuous.
chi shar riktong jenpé zé
And whatever arises is food for the bare rigpa emptiness,
ji gyu chöku gyalpö tsal
Whatever stirs in the mind is the inner power of the dharmakāya king,
jemé rang dak a la la
Leaving no trace, and innately pure. What joy!
char luk ngar dang drawa la
The way things arise may be the same as before,
drol luk khyepar né du ché
But the difference lies in the way they are liberated: that’s the key.
dimé gompa trulpé lam
Without this, meditation is but the path of delusion,
diden ma gom chökü ngang
With it, even without meditating, there’s the state of dharmakāya—
deng drol tok tu chawa té né sumpa o
The third vital point is: confidence directly in the liberation of rising thoughts.
4. Colophon
né sum denpé tawa la
For the View which has the three vital points,
khyentsé drelwé gompa dang
Meditation, the union of wisdom and love,
gyalsé chi yi chöpa drok
Is accompanied by the Action common to all the bodhisattvas.
dü sum gyalwé shyal dur kyang
Were all the buddhas to confer,
di lé lhakpé damngak mé
No instruction would they find greater than this,
riktsal chökü tertön gyi
Brought out as a treasure from the depth of transcendental insight,
sherab long né ter du lang
By the tertön of dharmakāya, the inner power of rigpa,
sa dö chü dang di mi dra
Nothing like ordinary treasures of earth and stone,
garab dorje shyal chem yin
For it is the final testament of Garab Dorje,
gyüpa sum gyi tuk chü yin
The essence of the wisdom mind of the three transmissions.
nying gi bu la té do gya
It is entrusted to my heart disciples, sealed to be secret.
zab dön yin no nying gi tam
It is profound in meaning, my heart’s words.
nying tam yin no dön gyi né
It is the words of my heart, the crucial key point.
dön né yalwar ma dor chik
This crucial point: never hold it cheap.
damngak zak su ma juk chik
Never let this instruction slip away from you.

khepa shri gyalpö khyechö so
This is the special teaching of the wise and glorious king.

| Rigpa Translations, 2008.